arXiv:2504.00797v1 [cs.CY] 1 Apr 2025Bridging the Gap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability in AIR esearchand Practice ALEXANDRASASHA LUCCIONIand GIADA PISTILLI, Hugging Face, Canada/France RAESETJESEFALA andNYALLENG MOOROSI, DistributedAIResearch Institute,Canada/Lesotho AsthepossibilitiesforArtiﬁcialIntelligence(AI)havegrown,sohav econcernsregardingitsimpactsonsocietyandtheenvironment. However,theseissuesareoftenraisedseparately;i.e.carbon footprintanalysesofAImodelstypicallydonotconsiderhowthepur suit ofscalehascontributedtowardsbuildingmodelsthatarebothinacc essibletomostresearchersintermsofcostanddisproportionatel y harmfultotheenvironment. Ontheotherhand,modelaudits thataimt oevaluatemodelperformance anddisparateimpacts mostly failtoengagewiththeenvironmentalramiﬁcations ofAImodelsandhowth eseﬁtintotheirauditingapproaches. Inthisseparation, bothresearchdirectionsfailtocapturethedepthofanalysisthat canbeexploredbyconsideringthetwoinparallelandthepotential solutionsformakinginformedchoicesthatcanbedevelopedattheirc onvergence.Inthisessay,webuilduponworkcarriedoutinAI andinsistercommunities,suchasphilosophyandsustainabledevelopm ent,tomakemoredeliberateconnectionsaroundtopicssuch as generalizability, transparency, evaluation and equity across AI r esearch and practice. We argue that the eﬀorts aiming to study AI s ethical ramiﬁcations should be made in tandem with those evalua ting its impacts on the environment, and we conclude with a proposal of bestpractices tobetterintegrateAI ethicsand susta inabilityin AIresearch and practice. 1 INTRODUCTION In recent years, AI systems have become pervasive, presente d as a key tool in the ﬁght against climate change [168] and in societally-beneﬁcial domains such as health and educ ation[64, 71, 87]. However, the training and deployment of AI systems also comes with a cost in terms of energy and natu ral resources [52, 117, 192] and can inadvertently result in the ampliﬁcation of inequalities [183] and prolif eration of biases [6] when systems are put into practice. Historically, the societal and environmental impacts of AI systems have been addressed separately, in two distinct areasofstudy i.e.scholarshipthataimstoaddresstheeth icsofAImodelsfocusesonaspectssuchasbiasevaluation or auditing [33, 201], typically overlooking models impac ts on natural resources and ecosystems [127]. Conversely, work that aims to estimate the growing carbon footprint and e nergy consumption of AI models [121, 192] does not typicallyaddress thecontributionthis has towards shifti ng thebalanceof poweroramplifying inequalities [1,2]. Some recent scholarship has started to establish explicit l inks between ethics and sustainability often hones in on speciﬁcapplications,suchastheemblematic"StochasticP arrots"paper,whichaddressesbothsustainabilityandeth ics as issues in the context of large language models (LLMs) [16] . Apart from this exception and a precious few others, conversationsaroundAIethicsandsustainabilityhavetak enplaceseparately,indiﬀerentvenuesandbydiﬀerentsets of stakeholders. However, since in both AI sustainability a nd AI ethics research, the aim is to think through how we might develop technologies which are useful and inclusive w hile we limit harm to people and environments, similar themes emerge, oftenstructuredviaconceptssuchasfuncti onalityandeﬃciency justasmuchasjustice,fairness and equity.In bothof thesedisciplines. In the present article, we highlight these transversal them es and argue that both the societal and environmental impacts of AI systems should be considered in parallel in all aspects of AI theory, practice and governance. Drawing upon work from within the AI community as well as related ﬁeld s, we explore a series of use cases illustrating that Authors addresses:Alexandra Sasha Luccioni; Giada Pisti lli, sasha.luccioni@huggingface.co, Hugging Face, Canad a/France; Raesetje Sefala; Nyalleng Moorosi,DistributedAI ResearchInstitute, Canada/Lesot ho. 1 2 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefal a, and Nyalleng Moorosi ethics and sustainability go hand-in-glove when it comes to the development and the deployment of AI systems. By doing so,we hopeto shed light onthe importanceof pursuingr esearch that blends together diﬀerent perspectives to allowfor abetterunderstanding ofthesocietalimpacts ofA I systems. Giventhatourgoalistoallowourworktobereadandundersto odbyavarietyofaudiences,westart,inSection 2, by deﬁning the concepts and terms that are core to our subsequ ent analysis. We continue by examining the current stateofAIethicsandsustainabilityfrom3diﬀerentbutcom plementaryperspectives:theoreticalprinciplesandfram eworks ( 3.1), AI research and practice( 3.2), and AI regula tion and governance ( 3.3). Next, in 4, we identify four transversal themes that we have found to beparticularlycen tral to both AI ethics and sustainability: generalizabilit y, evaluation, transparency, and power. Finally, in 5, we pro poseways forward at the intersection of these themes and threedirections of AI research and practice.We wrapupthea rticlewithideas forfutureworkthat canbepursuedat thenexus of AI ethics and sustainability and abrief conclus ion. 2 KEY CONCEPTSANDDEFINITIONS Sustainability When it comes to the concept of sustainability, one of its ﬁrs t and most widely-accepted deﬁnitions originates from the1987BrundtlandReport,whichdeﬁnessustainabledevel opmentas developmentthatmeetstheneedsofthepresent without compromising the ability of future generations to m eet their own needs [1987][p.41]. This deﬁnition remains centraltotheﬁeldofsustainabilitywritelarge,informin gframeworkssuchastheUNSustainableDevelopmentGoals (SDGs),whichweredevelopedin2015asablueprintforachie vingpeaceandprosperityforpeopleandtheplanet[199]. However, also in 1987, environmental economist Edward Barb ier proposed an alternative deﬁnition to sustainability, structuring it around three pillars: environmental, socie tal and economic, arguing that sustainable development can only be truly achieved when both environmental stewardship , social equity and economic viability coexist and are inter-connected [1987]. In the context of AI, the term sustainability is most often used to refer solely to environmental sustainability [41, 61]. The umbrella term Sustainable AI was initially propo sed by van Wynsberghe as a ﬁeld of practice that both aims to use AI in climate-positive applications, as well as i mproving upon the (environmental) sustainability of AI approaches themselves [203]. This proposal would then enco mpass the vast variety of work being done at the nexus ofmachinelearningandﬁeldssuchasbiodiversitymonitori ng,agriculture,transportation,etc.(forareview,see[2 06] and[168]).AIandsustainabilityhasalsobeencentraltowo rkshopssuchasSustaiNLPandtheInternationalSustainabl e AI Workshop, that have put the emphasis on eﬃcient methods an d the application of AI to sustainability-related problems,aswell astheTacklingClimateChange with Machin eLearning workshop,whichaims todemonstratethat AI can beaninvaluable toolinhelping societyadapttoand mi tigatetheeﬀects of climatechange. Ethics Inherently characterized by ongoing perplexity, ethics as pires for certainty and consensus, yet also remains dynamic and evolving. It has its origins in thework of philosopherss uch as Aristotle,who positedthatethics connects theory withpraxis,with thegoalof guiding humanactions towards eudaimonia (i.e. thehighest humangood)[8].Inthemillennia sinceAristotle,thephilosophicalsub-domainofap pliedethicshas soughttoestablish normativeprinciples f or avarietyofhumanactivities anddomains,whichinexorably dependonthecontextofapplicationandtheindividuals Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 3 involved,leadingtomuchdebateregardingwhichnormsshou ldbeapplicableinwhichcontexts,aswellasthedeﬁnitionofkey ethicalconceptssuchas fairness [89,175],tran sparency [60,147]and,indeed,thevery deﬁnitionofethics itself [21,195]. Lacking consensus,theﬁeldofAIethicsoftenappliesWeste rnmoraltheoriesranging fromutilitarianism[18,134] toegalitarianism [209]andvirtueethics[7,8]toproposew aysofassessing theethicalityofAIsystems.However, the application of these moral theories faces challenges given the diﬃculty of, e.g. quantifying the concept of utility in utilitarianism,assessingandcomparingwhoisworseoﬀine galitarianism,orevaluatingculturalvariabilityindeﬁn ing virtues in virtue ethics. This is also the case in terms of the application of these theories in modern-day contexts involvingnewtypesofAI-driventechnologiessuchasrobot sorautonomousvehicles,whichcanbelimitedwithouta comprehensiveunderstandingofbothAI stechnicalcapabi lities(e.g.thelimitationsoftheunderlyingmodels)aswe ll as the diversity of life experiences of the peopleusing thes e tools,who can interact with them in ways that are hard to predict or design for [102]. Given that these concepts enc ompass work from a multitude of domains that espouse diﬀerent objectives, values and methods [23], their deﬁnit ion can have major consequences on the way in which these concepts are operationalizedin AI models and systems [10, 65, 183]. Work that addresses the ethical aspects of AI systems is discussed and published in conferences such as the ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT), as well as the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES), which both have a cross-disciplinary focusand cover a multitudeof topicsin terms ofthesocietaland ethical aspectsof AI. 3 EXISTING SCHOLARSHIP INAI ETHICSANDSUSTAINABILITY Inthesectionsbelow,weexploreexisting scholarshipinor dertocriticallyanalyzehowbothethics andsustainabilit y aredeﬁnedintheoryandoperationalizedinpracticewithin thediversecommunitiesthatpursueAI.First,wedescribe theprinciplesandframeworksthathavebeenproposedtogui deAIfrombothanethicalandenvironmentalperspective; next, we examine how these principles are applied, implicit ly and explicitly, in AI research and practice. Finally, we lookatseveral recentapproachesforregulatingandgovern ing AIandthediﬀerent rolesadoptedbystakeholdersand organizations. 3.1 Principles andFrameworks Acommonstartingpointtoensure theethicaldevelopment an ddeployment ofAIsystems isthedeﬁnitionofastructure for guiding this process, which can be operationalized via sets of principles or a framework. On the one hand, ethical principles are often deﬁned at a high level, describ ing values and concepts outside of any speciﬁc context of deployment.Assuch,multiplesetsofguidingprinciplesfo r ethicalAI havebeenproposedbydiﬀerentorganizations ranging from research institutes to nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt entities. However, given the many diﬀerent types of AI approachesthatexist,aswellascontextualfactorsthatin ﬂuence theirapplication,itisdiﬃculttodeﬁneuniversal, or even generalizable, guidelines. Tothis point,a 2019analy sis byJobinet al.reviewed 84 sets of guidelines mentioning a variety of principles, ﬁnding very limited convergence be tween them but identifying the values of transparency, fairness, non-maleﬁcence, privacy and responsibility as b eing most common [2019]. Similarly, a multitude of ethical frameworks have been proposed, with most of them espousing s peciﬁc visions of ethics by putting an emphasis on aspectsranging fromhumanempowerment[64]tovirtueethic s[79].Incomparisontoprinciples,ethicalframeworks often aim to frame ethics from the perspective of implementa tion, identifying how challenges can be addressed and how to build consensus around ethical values, often anchore d to speciﬁc contexts of deployment of AI systems, such as medicine [125] or autonomous vehicles [109]. However, th e technological mechanisms proposedto operationalize 4 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefal a, and Nyalleng Moorosi these frameworks are often deﬁned in abstract terms, which h ave been found to be diﬃcult to implement in practice from anengineering perspective,making them diﬃculttoope rationalizeinpractice[155].Interms of environmental sustainability,theUN SDGsaremostcommonlyusedtoinform AIframeworks [72],withinspirationfromﬁeldssuch as ecology to guide the deﬁnition of methods based on metrics and evaluation methods that enable a more holistic assessment of AI s environmental impacts. [112]. However, similarly to AI principles, there is an equal multiplicity of AI frameworks, and multiple analyses have been carried ou t with the goal of establishing overlap and transversal connections, which were foundtobelacking [14,155,205]. Conversely,analysesofethicalAIprincipleshavealsoobs ervedagenerallackofrecognitionofAI senvironmental impactswithinthediﬀerentsetsofprinciplesthathavebee ndeﬁned.Diﬀerentreasonshavebeenproposedforthislack of connection, from the reliance of most AI principles on tra ditional Western ethical perspectives, which are humancentered and assign intrinsic value tohuman beings above ot her living things [28],to thepaucityof research on AI s environmental impacts, which hinders the development of co herent principles [25].When sustainability is addressed in ethical AI frameworks, it is once again only limited to env ironmental sustainability, notably carbon footprint estimation. For instance, several industry-led sets of princ iples speciﬁcallyaddressing the environmental sustainab ility of AI have been proposedin recent years by organizations suc h as Salesforce [2024] and the Green SoftwareFoundation[2023].Whilethesepropositionstouchuponmetricssu chasenergy eﬃciency,theydonotaddresstopicssuchas rebound eﬀects [120]1, transparency and access to compute, which we consider to be core to these discussions and whichwediscussinSection4.Nonetheless,certainframewo rks,suchastheUNESCOrecommendationsontheethics ofartiﬁcialintelligence [2021]doemphasizetheimportan ceofsustainabilityandofevaluating technologiesbasedo n their environmental impactsvia theUN SDGs, which,as discu ssedintheintroduction,have sustainabledevelopment attheir core which weexplorein moredepthin subsequentse ctions. 3.2 Research andPractice GiventhatAIisadistributedﬁeldconsistingofamultitude ofpractitionersandorganizations,thepracticalapplica tion of the principles and frameworks described in the previous s ection can diﬀer immensely. In a 2022 study of papers submittedtoconferences suchasICMLandNeurIPS,Birhanee tal.analyzedthevaluesthatwerehighlightedbytheir authors i.e. the positive attributes of their project that they emphasized and the negative impacts they considered explicitly[2022a].Fromthe59valuestheyidentiﬁed,them ostemphasiswasputonaspectssuchastechnicalprogress, quantitativeevidence, andnovelty, whereas ethicalconsi derations aroundvalues suchasbeneﬁcence, interpretabil ity and respect for privacy (which are core to many AI principles and frameworks cited above) were present only in a fractionof papers.Also,not a single one of thevalues Birha ne et al. identiﬁed was explicitlylinked toenvironmental sustainability,highlightingonceagainthelackofconnec tionintheresearchcommunitywithsustainabilitywritlar ge. Progressing from this observation, while sustainabilityoriented research has not been prominently featured in venues that directly address AI ethics, it remains a topic of research that has been gathering momentum in recent years. The ﬁrst research to formally address the environmen tal impacts of training AI models was the seminal 2019 article by Strubell et al. which quantiﬁed the carbon footpr int of training BERT, a large language model (LLM), as reaching 626,155 pounds of /u1D436/u1D4422emissions [192]. Follow-up work by other researchers has sh ed more light on this issue, revealing diﬀerent aspects of model architecture [1 53] and training procedure [53] that can impact its ensuing 1The relationship between eﬃciency and sustainability is fa r from straightforward, given phenomena such as rebound eﬀe cts, in which improved eﬃciencyof agiventechnology canleadto increasedusageof itand thereforeincreasethe overallconsumption ofresour ces see [27, 120]foramore in-depth review. Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 5 carbonfootprint.Theﬁrstproposalfor GreenAI ,i.e.AIr esearchthattakesenvironmentalimpactsintoconsiderati on whentrainingAImodels,wasmadebySchwartzetal.in2020[1 81]-itwassubsequentlybroadenedtoincludeaspects such ashardware and scaling [215]and modeldeployment [121 ]morerecently.However, this ﬁeld ofresearch, while increasingly proliﬁc, has failed to take ethical considera tions into account in its analyses, focusing solely on aspec ts such as carbon intensity and energy eﬃciency, and not on issu es such as the environmental impacts of increased consumption due to the use of AI in targeted advertising [96] , or the application of AI in the oil and gas sector [77], which are liabletocounter-balanceany actualeﬃciency gai ns2. 3.3 Governance andRegulation Governance and regulation aim to establish mechanisms for d ecision-making, guiding the development and deployment of AI systems, and outlining the roles and responsibili ties of each party involved [219]. There are many distributed eﬀorts for governance in AI whose aim is to develop e thical guardrails, with some highlighting the importanceofinternationalinstitutions[85],andothersfocus ingonthepublicsector[101] reﬂectingthatbothbottom-u p and top-down endeavors are useful to establish functional m echanisms for governing AI. If we take a look at recent community endeavors for AI governance, the 2022 Big Science workshop proposeda bottom-upapproach that established mechanisms for various ethical aspects of the projec t such as data governance, quality metrics, and fostering stakeholdercollaborationandtransparency[92],aswella sdraftingaconsensus-driven ethicalframeworkforgovern - ing the resulting artifacts that encompasses bothlegal and technical dimensions [154].Interestingly, Big Science wa s one of the few projects that also considered and documented t he carbon footprint of model training, evaluation and deployment, proposing a holistic, life cycle approach to es timating emissions [121]. There have also been proposals arguing for putting sustainability in the center of AI devel opment and deployment [203], as well as frameworks for certifying thesustainabilityofAIsystems [25],acrossal lthediﬀerent pillarsofsustainability(i.e. social,envi ronmental and economic) [70]. However, we are still at the beginnin g of building governance mechanisms that oﬀer a more comprehensive analysis of theimpactsof AI systems from the perspectiveof ethics and sustainability. A pivotal example of top-down governance is the European Uni on s AI Act, which draws from broadly deﬁned ethical principles toinform its regulations [39].In fact, thetextoftheActdemonstrates considerableprogress foll owing the recent European dialogues, seeking to regulate AI ap plications that may infringe on human rights, adhering, among others, to the ethical principles of human oversight, human agency and transparency. Moreover, the AI Act s foundationonthepremisethatriskequatestopotentialhum anrightsharms[152]echoesoneofthelongstandingtraditionsinAIethicsofprioritizinghumanrights[9,216].T hisapproachembodiestheethicalcommitmenttosafeguard fundamentalfreedomsandhumanrightsinthedigitalera,en suringthatAItechnologiesdonotinfringeupontheseimportantprinciples.However,whilebothEUAIAct[2022],as wellassimilarregulatoryinitiatives inChina [2023]and Canada[2023]pointtotheneedtoprotectbothfundamentalh umanrightsaswellastolimitdamagetoenvironment, there are no oﬃcial provisions regarding sustainability in any of their texts, and it remains to be seen how existing standards for environmental impacts in all of these jurisdi ctions will apply to AI systems. Similarly, sustainability considerationswerealsolackinginthe2023US ExecutiveOr derregarding AI[20],whichdidnotmentionAI sgreenhouse gas emissions nor energy usage, as well as multi-natio n declarations such as the Bletchley Declaration [2023], illustratingthedisconnect between sustainabilityand et hics inrecent approaches toAI regulation. 2Recent media coverage of Microsoft s sustainability promi ses has estimated that a single contract to use AI to expand oi l production could enable carbonemissionsadding upto 640 percent of the company sca rbonremovaltargets"[191]. 6 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefal a, and Nyalleng Moorosi 4 TRANSVERSAL ISSUES INAI ETHICSANDSUSTAINABILITY "Is it fair ... that the residents of the Maldives (likely to b e underwater by 2100) or the 800,000 people in Sudanaﬀectedbydrasticﬂoodspaytheenvironmentalpriceo ftraininganddeployingeverlargerEnglish LMs,whensimilarlarge-scale modelsaren tbeingproduced for Dhivehior SudaneseArabic? " Bender, Gebru etal.[2021] In the current section, we deﬁne four recurring issues that w e have found to be particularly salient to discussions around both AI ethics and sustainability. These issues are i nspired by previous carried out by critical scholars such as Dobbe and Whittaker [2019], Birhane [2022b], van Wynsber ghe [2021] as well as Bender and Gebru [2021], as cited above. We start, in Section 4.1 with a discussion of the perils of assumptions of the generalizability of data and modelsinbothethicsandsustainability.Wefollow,inSect ion4.2withareﬂectionuponthecurrentstateofevaluation of AI systems, what is measured, what is missing, and why that matters. Next, we remark upon the current lack of transparencywithregardstoinformationrelevanttobothe thicsandsustainabilityinSection4.3.Finally,inSectio n4.4, we discuss the balance of power and the allocation of justice , and how existing inequalities can be further ampliﬁed byAI systems. 4.1 Generalizability AI technologies function based on assumptions of generaliz ability and representativeness i.e. that given suﬃcient data,anAImodelcanlearntoaccuratelyrepresent (any) giv enprocessandeven adapttopreviouslyunseendata[74]. For instance, the concept of pre-training AI models on large datasets such as ImageNet [47] dates back to the early 1990s [178] and has since become the dominant training parad igm in both computer vision [162, 193] and natural languageprocessing[50,114].Infact,pre-trainingishea vilydependentupontheassumptionofrepresentativenessi.e. thatthehugeamountsoftrainingdatausedforpre-training representtheworldasawhole,oratleastasuﬃcientpart ofittobeusefulforanykindofdownstream application(i.e . ﬁne-tuning, transferlearning, etc).Whilethelimitatio ns of such claims for bothAI models and datasets have been previ ously shown (see Chasalow and Levy [36], Kochet al. [98], Raji et al. [157], Smith et al. [188]), the theory of gen eralizability, and the perception of certain types of AI models, ie. LLMs, as general purpose technologies contin ues to persist [57]. This can come with both ethical and environmental ramiﬁcations when systems trained under the pretense of generalizability are appliedin contexts that diﬀer from theones represented in their training data wedi scuss someofthese below. GiventhedatathatfuelsAImodelsisproducedbyhumans,iti sintrinsicallyladenwithsubjectivejudgments[132] and representative of speciﬁcworldviews [46]. Numerous st udies have shown that boththedata used for training AI models[54, 157,166]and themodelsthemselves [16,73,213] are not,infact, representative of theworldat large and that the biases contained in training data persist even if fu rther ﬁne-tuning is carried out [103], which can have cascade eﬀectswhenmodelsaredeployedinproduction[173],w hichcancontributetoperpetuatingnegativebiases[68]. Similarly, oﬀ-the-shelf, proprietary technologies that a re marketed as generic can fail at the tasks when applied in diﬀering contexts,e.g. inapplications suchas facial reco gnition(when theyfail torecognize peoplefrom population s under-represented in training datasets [33]) and crime pre diction (where they have dismal accuracy rates across different locations [174]) and yet, out-of-the-box AI system s for these tasks and many others continue to be built and deployed under the assumptions that they will work no matter the context of their application. This can have devastatingeﬀects onalreadymarginalized communities when app liedfortasks such as criminal sentencing [6],and facial recognition [33]. Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 7 Similarlytodataconcerning humanbeings,environmental a ndecologicaldatacanalsocontainbiases,forinstance initstemporalcoverageandgeographicalspread,whichcan beasdamagingtobiomes3ofplantsandanimalsasthey are to communities of humans [95, 187]. From a modeling persp ective, AI models trained to carry out biodiversity monitoring on one ecosystem often fail to perform accuratel y on others, no matter the species [99, 184], and yet ecological bias assessments are not often carried out befor e model training. In fact, White et al. refer to geographical diﬀerences inecologicaldatasetsasthemainfactorlimiti ngourcapacitytopredicthowbiodiversitywillbeimpacted byfuturechanges intheclimate,notablyduetomissingdata fromregions suchasAfricaandSouthAmerica,making data-driven approaches such as AIunrepresentative ofenti re continents [210]. An example of the dire consequences this can have can be found in the ﬁeld of short-term climate modeling and disaster detection, which relies on data from sensors and we ather radar stations that allow for events such as ﬂoods and wildﬁres to be tracked in real-time across borders, ocea ns and continents. While geospatial data is inherently global (given that satellites circle the planet as a whole), it relies upon assumptions of generalizability that often fail to hold when applied in contexts that diﬀer from the trai ning data, or the fact that many regions are missing these data sources for reasons ranging from insuﬃcient fund ing and aging technological infrastructure to lack of connectivity[37,198],which resultsindatagaps[182,197 ].This cancomeatacosttoliving beings, bothhumanand animal, in the regions and contexts where these technologie s are applied for instance in early warning systems for extreme weather events [150].and deforestation detection [97]. Of course, any assessment of representativity (or lac k thereof) hinges uponanappropriateevaluationof thisassu mption which weaddress in thefollowingsection. 4.2 Evaluation A popular adage states that you can t improve what you don t measure 4; in the context of AI systems, this can be translated into the fact that the criteria that we use to eval uate AI systems and the way in which this evaluation are carried out are important i.e. the metrics we choose help us embed our values as communities about outcomes we wish to seeand those that we putless emphasis on [136].While leaderboards such as Papers With Codetend to only measure performance-based metrics such as accuracy or prec ision, factoring in other metrics can make comparisons betweendiﬀerentmodelsmoremeaningfulandactionable.Th isisduetothefactthatreal-worldconstraintsonmodel deployment often result in trade-oﬀs being made between diﬀ erent factors that include accuracy and eﬃciency [31], but also robustness [217], inclusion [88] and data quality [ 11]. This means that in order to meaningfully assess the utilityofAIsystems indiﬀerent practicalcontexts,other measures mustbeconsidered inparalleltoperformanceand accuracy [122]; and often the best people to do the assessmen ts for the trade-oﬀs are the populations who will use these tools. For example, when it comes to the evaluation of g enerative technologies such as large language models, these do not have a single well-established evaluation appr oach [139, 159]. Approaches that are used for evaluating theirethicallimitationsincludered-teaming[66],exter nalaudits[139,158]aswellasmoreholisticmodelevaluati ons that reﬂect diﬀerent aspects of model performance [26, 67]. However, critiques of the approaches described above also include their non-inclusivity of marginalized commun ities [48] as well as a lack of formalized approaches and standardsformodelevaluation,makingapples-to-applesc omparisonsbetweenmodelsdiﬃcult[40].Also,asmanyof the most widely deployed AI systems are currently proprieta ry and direct access to models is not possible, it is hard toexhaustively evaluate many popularcommercial modelsfo r anymeaningful evaluationtotakeplace[118,190]. 3A biomeisabio-geographicalunit that corresponds to acomm unity of plants and animalsthat shareaphysicalenvironmen t and a climate. 4The quote isoften attributed to Peter Drucker,although its exactorigins areunclear. 8 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefal a, and Nyalleng Moorosi Similarly,evaluating theenvironmental impacts ofAI syst ems is far fromstraightforward,and we arestillmissing many pieces of the puzzle needed in order to meaningfully est imate these impacts. For instance, most of the carbon footprintassessments onlyfocus onthetraining stage ofAI models,which is easier toquantifyand report[153,192], but which only represents a portion of models total environ mental impacts. In a 2023 article estimating the carbon footprint of BLOOM, a 176 billion parameter LLM, Luccioni et al. proposed using a Life Cycle Assessment approach for this evaluation, since it takes into account diﬀerent st ages of the model life cycle including the manufacturing of computing hardware, idle energy usage, and model deploymen t, ﬁnding that training accounted for only half of the model s overall emissions [121], meaning that similar stud ies that only took training into account were potentially underestimating their emissions by half. Also, while comme ndable in terms of its granularity, this kind of carbon accountingfailstorecognizethesocietalandeconomicasp ectsofsustainability,suchasthecontributionofLLMssuc h as BLOOM towards amplifying the existing inequalities in th e ﬁeld of AI due to the increased amount of computing resourcesthattheyrequire,whichareunattainabletomany membersoftheAIcommunity,aswellasthepropagation of biases via their usage. Furthermore, the authors themsel ves note that there is currently no information available about the embodied emissions linked to manufacturing GPUs, so it is impossible to estimate what portion of the overall carbonfootprintthis represents. This highlights that the emphasis onenvironmental sustainability often fa ils to account for other aspects of AI s global impacts and any k ind of evaluation hinges upon transparency, which is sorelylacking in theﬁeldofAI wediscuss this inmorelengt h inthefollowingsection. 4.3 Transparency Transparency is widely recognized as a fundamental princip le in science in general and AI in particular[63, 107, 208, 212] but actualizing it in practice can be challenging. This is, in part, due to the fact that machine learning-based systemsarenotinherentlytransparentorinterpretable,g iventhecomplexityoftheneuralnetworkarchitecturesthe y espouse and the number of parameters they contain [105, 113, 140]. Eﬀorts such as interpretability approaches are useful and can help interpret the predictions of models post hoc [104, 164], whereas artifacts such as data sheets and model cards [69, 137] can contribute towards making AI syste ms more understandable for users, providing essential information about AI models in a user-friendly format. Thes e artifacts allow users to understand not just how an AIsystemfunctions,butalsoitslimitations,potentialbi ases,implications,andenvironmental impacts.However,e ven thoughmodelcardsareincreasinglyusedinpractice(forin stancebyAImodel-sharingplatformssuchasHuggingFace) andprovideimportantinformationaboutmodels,theyareno tsuﬃcienttoguarantee,forinstance,thereproducibility of reportedresults,which is a coretenet of scientiﬁc pract ice[146]. Indeed, several studies of transparency found that an overw helming amount of results published at technical AI conferencesdonotdocumentallofthevariablesnecessaryt oreproducetheresultstheyreport[78,156].Thissituatio n highlightstheneedforanapproachtotransparencythatwou ldinvolvereportingbutalsoensuringthereproducibility of AI models and their ﬁndings. Such an approach would acknow ledge the connection between transparency and reproducibility: transparent research practices enable r eproducibility, which in turn facilitates independent scr utiny, validation,furtherdevelopmentofresearchﬁndingsbyoth erscientists[80].Theabsenceoftransparency,especiall yin sharingessentialmaterialssuchasmodelweights,codeand data,impedestheabilitytoreproduceresults,diminishin g AI models scientiﬁc impactand impeding theiradoptionwit hinthewiderscientiﬁc community[80]. Intermsofsustainability,theAIcommunityhashistorical lybeenevenlesstransparentregardingtheenvironmental impactsofAImodelsandsystems,withmostworkinthisﬁeldb eingdonepost-hocbyresearcherswhodidnotdothe initial model training and deployment (e.g. [116, 192]). Th e most common environmental sustainability metric for AI Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 9 models,their carbon footprint,is rarely, if ever, disclos ed.While model cards of recent models such as BLOOM [214] and StableDiﬀusion[169]haveincludedcarbonfootprintin formation,itremains farfromcommoninformationcommunicated by model creators recent work has found that the o verwhelming majority of models shared publicly do not includethis information[34].Infact,mostcarbonfoot printanalyses gather theinformationmanuallybywriting to authors. For instance, Luccioni and Hernandez-Garcia re ached out to over 500 authors of AI papers to get information needed to estimate the carbonfootprintof their mode ls, and were only able to collect95 answers, with many authorsrefusing toprovide therelevant information,citi ng privacyconcerns and lack ofexperimental logs [2023].In fact, until recent years, the general emphasis in the AI comm unity was put onthe eﬃciency and greenness of AI as opposedtoitsenvironmentalcosts,whicharenowslowlysta rtingtogaintractionasanimportantconsiderationforAI systems[86,141].Infact,giventheincreasingsizeandcom putationalrequirementsofmodelsbeingproductionizedin recent years (especiallyLLMs), trainingthemis onlyacces sibletoasmallfractionoftheAIcommunity,which means that the organizations who have the necessary resources for this have a disproportionate inﬂuence on the ﬁeld as a whole wediscuss this in thefollowingsection. 4.4 Powerand Equity ModernAIresearchandpracticearenotequitablebydesign: theircostintermsofcomputerhardwareaswellashuman skillsmeansthatonlyasmallpercentageofbothacademican dindustrialorganizationscancontributetomanyaspects ofmodeldevelopment.WiththerecentadventofAImodelsofe ver-increasing scaleandcomplexity,thedigitaldivide inAIisonlyincreasing,asittakesmorecomputeandhumansk illtotrainanddeployAImodelsandsystems[1,19,35, 118].This means thatthefuturewide-sweeping beneﬁts that AI technologies are promised tohave for humanity as a whole[149]arecontingent uponaccesstotechnologiesthat arefundamentallyunequallydistributed.Despiteexplici t proposalstopursuemoreequitableandexplicitlyde-colon ialistapproaches[124,138],the bigger-is-better para digm continues to be central to AI research and practice [204]. In a similar fashion, the places where AI research is being carried out are also skewed towards institutions from a hand ful of countries mostly located in the Global North [2], which inexorably impacts the choices made during the AI deve lopment and deployment process, introducing many biases(whichwehavealreadyaddressedinprevioussection s).Infact,recentworkhasproposedthattheverypursuit ofsustainableAIhastheoppositeeﬀect,contributingtowa rdsmaintaining thestatusquoand securingthedominant socio-economicinterestsofneo-liberalcapitalism"[180 ].Forinstance,majortechnologicalcorporationshaveded icated signiﬁcant resources towards solutions such as improving t he eﬃciency of their data centers, proposing numerous initiatives towards technologicalsustainability [4,75] ,including research at thenexus ofAI and theclimate[44,12 8]. However, bothMicrosoftand Googleannounced thatthey woul dmiss their 2024sustainability targets,duein partto the energy demands of the AI tools that they have been develop ing and deploying [130, 161]. The impacts of these computation-intensive data centers can further be expande d to include the mining of rare metals and the disposal of e-waste, both of which predominantly aﬀect countries from t he Global South which proﬁting technology companies from theGlobalNorth[86,194]. SimilarlytoAI,issuesofpower,equityandjusticearealso centralintheﬁeldofsustainability,sinceclimatechange is an inherently inequitable phenomenon with a handful of c ountries and regions in North America, East Asia and Europeresponsiblefora disproportionateportionofgloba lemissions, whiletheimpactsofsea level riseand extreme weather events beingfelt moststrongly incountries with ve ry minimal carbonfootprints,raising questions ofequity and justice and how to address them [49, 126, 151, 177]. Simil arly, the majority of climate-focused AI solutions overlookissues ofjusticeandpower,focusingpredominantlyon theclimate-positiveaspectsoftechnologiesand notwho 10 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefa la, and Nyalleng Moorosi standstobeneﬁtfromthem,orwhethertheseissues canbesol vedwithtechnologyintheﬁrstplace[30].Forinstance, when AI systems that carry out precision agriculture are dev eloped, the emphasis is made on eﬃciency or increased cropyields[185],andnotthefactthatthesesystemsarelia bletoreplacealreadyunderprivilegedcommunitiessuchas migrantworkersthattraditionallyharvestedcropsbyhand ,orthedisparateimpactsofproposedsolutionsondiﬀerent communities [55, 207, 218]. In addition, AI technologies ca n be seen as further exacerbating the existing inequalities in terms of thedistributionof power and proﬁts[83] and perp etuatingthe existing extractionist approaches in terms oflaborbyexploitingalreadyunder-paidandmarginalized workersfordatacollectionandlabelingtasks[165]aswell as creating a new class of precarious crowd-sourced workers [211], which are often locatedin the Global South or in already marginalized communities, where theimpactsof cli matechange have reducedtheviability oftraditional professions suchasfarming[81,163].Thisisanadditionalexa mpleforwhyweadvocateforestablishingmoreconcerted eﬀorts forintegrating AIethics and sustainability wedes cribethese inthefollowingsection. 5 ESTABLISHING BEST PRACTICESFORAI ETHICSAND SUSTAINABIL ITY Havingestablishedamultitudeoftransversaltopicsthats panAIethicsandsustainability,wenowfocusonproposing bestpracticesthatwouldintegratethetwoinAIresearch an dpractice.Wedrawuponexistingworktoshowhowwe can build upon it both within the AI community and in tandem wi th members of other communities ranging from sustainabledevelopment topolicy-making and engineering . Principles andFrameworks Research andPractice GovernanceandRegulation GeneralizabilityShiftingfrom thedominant Westernmoral philosophies toincludeperspectives from non-WesterntraditionsStudying howwellAImodels generalizetodiﬀerentpopulations of human and non-human living beingsEspousing bottom-up governance approaches based on thecultural, societal and geographical constraints ofAI systemdeployment EvaluationDevelopingframeworksthat accommodate bothethicaland environmental responsibilityCarrying out more holistic evaluation of modelsand systems, spanning bothethicaland environmental criteriaIntegratingbothsocial and environmental assessments intoexistingand in-progress AIregulation TransparencyBroadening thescope of transparency toincludeits social andenvironmental aspectsCommunicate thecosts and impacts of AIsystems on boththe environment and societyRequiring deployedAI systems tocarry out audits andreport a minimum of metricsspanning bothbias andethics PowerDevelopingprinciples and frameworksthat address bothhuman andecological needsMake equity-informed trade-oﬀs whendeveloping and deployingAIInvolving multiplestakeholders, especially ones fromtheconcerned communities and areas,in the governance process Table 1. Asummaryofthe proposed best practices fordiﬀeren t axes that we coverin ourarticle 5.1 Principles In the context of AI, there are multiple facets of AI technolo gies that have to be taken into consideration, given the intersection between AI and the broader societal context in which it operates. Importantly, integrating broader sustainability into AI guidelines ensures that justice and fai rness are not just about social dimensions but also include respecting and protecting the environment i.e. expanding the deﬁnition of sustainable AI to include the social and economicpillarsproposedbyBarbier[12].Thisintegratio nalsoacknowledgesthattruejusticeinAIcannotbeachieve d withoutconsideringitsenvironmentalandsocietalimplic ations,whichhelpsbuildthebridgebetweencomplementary approaches in bothAI ethics and (environmental) sustainab ility research. Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 11 Generalizability. Giventheobserveddisconnectbetweenethicsandsustainab ilityinthecontextofAIprinciplesand frameworks, we ﬁnd that, while these oﬀer a valuablestartin g point,they often fall short in addressing AI s complex ethical issues duetotheirlack of contextualsensitivity [ 142].Wealso believe thatimproving uponthis necessitates a more nuanced and context-speciﬁc approach to AI ethics, one that embraces the varied ethical dimensions presented by AI, including its environmental implications. Current e thical charters in AI, often detached from this perplexity, representpreliminarythoughtsontheethicallandscapebu tlackthedepthrequiredformanypracticalapplications[5 ]. Byrecognizingtheselimitations,weintendnottodiscardt hesedeﬁnitionsandprinciplesbuttoimproveuponthem.In thiscontext,environmentalandsustainabilitychallenge srelatedtoAIdevelopmentanddeploymentareintegraltoth e broader ethical reﬂections withintheﬁeld.This integrati on betweenethics and sustainability inAI calls fora holist ic approach,whereethicalconsiderationsarenotviewedinis olationbutareintrinsicallylinkedwithenvironmental an d sustainabilityoversight. Forinstance, shifting fromthe dominantWesternmoralphilosophiestoincludeperspectiv es fromnon-Western traditionssuchas relational ethics [131 ],Ubuntuethics [145],and Confucianethics [111]canoﬀer valuable insights into community, social harmony, and the i nterconnectedness of beings, emphasizing the impact of AI onsocietyand interpersonal relationships. Evaluation. There is no one-size-ﬁts-all solution for either ethics or s ustainability and, indeed, no single way of concluding that an AI system is neither truly ethical nor sus tainable. Recent work has begun bridging the gap; for instance, workbyLynch etal.isinspired bytheconceptofur gentgovernance inenvironmental studies,whichdistinguishes system reliabilityand societalharmand advocates fortheconsiderationofbothwhenauditinginfrastructure and technologies [123]. Raji et al. use a similar approach fo r their proposed end-to-end framework for internal algorithmicauditingofAImodels,whichtakesintoaccountboth technicalandethicalassessments[159].Inasimilarvein, a recent model evaluation framework by Rakova et al., propos es an environmental justice-oriented lens to carry out algorithmicaudits[160],thatofGenovesi andMönigplaces sustainabilityatthecenter ofEthicalAIcertiﬁcation[70 ], while that of Metcalf et al. uses environmental impact asses sments as an example of a formal mechanism that can be usedtoinspire theassessment ofAItechnologies[129].All oftheseapproachesacknowledgethatethicaldecisionsin AIhaveenvironmentalconsequencesandviceversa,thusnec essitatingaframingthataccommodatesbothethicaland environmental responsibility. Transparency. When viewed as a means to foster greater accountability, tra nsparency takes on a central role: it becomes a principle that enhances ethical compliance and pr omotes environmental responsibility, contributing to sustainability. For instance, integrating social transpa rency and sustainability can be exempliﬁed by an AI system designed for urban planning, such as an AI tool developed to o ptimize city layouts for eﬃciency. In this example, to include sustainability approaches, developers would al so provide information on the environmental footprint of running the AI system, such as energy consumption during dat a processing and potential environmental beneﬁts of theproposedurbanlayouts,likereducedcarbonemissionsf romoptimizedtraﬃcﬂowsorgreenspaces.Inthisway,by deepeningtheconceptoftransparencytoincludesocialand environmental aspects,wewouldmovetowardscreating AIsystemsthataremorerobust,sociallyresponsibleandul timatelymoreaccountableabouttheenvironmentalimpacts they have and making moreinformed decisions based ontheinf ormationatourdisposal[51]. EquityandPower. Equityisaboutensuringfairaccessandparticipationinth ebeneﬁtsandgovernanceoftechnology acrossdiﬀerentcommunities,especiallythosehistorical lymarginalized.Philosophicalperspectivesonequity,dr awing 12 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefa la, and Nyalleng Moorosi from theories of distributive justice [106, 135], emphasiz e the necessity of equitable distribution of resources and r esponsibilities and risks associatedwith AI technologies. This principle is especiallyrelevant in environmental jus tice, wherethedisproportionateimpactofenvironmentalharmso nspeciﬁcpopulationsdemandsareevaluationofAItechnologiesaredeployedatscale forinstance,Schlosberg s theoryofrecognitionaljusticehighlights theimportance of recognizing andrespectingdiversecommunityneedsandval ues inenvironmental policies[176].Additionally,equity requiresthatAIdevelopmentactivelyincludesdiversevoi cesinitscreationandimplementationphases,ensuringtha t AI systems donot perpetuateexisting disparities butrathe r contributeto rectifying them. This approach draws upon environmental justice literature for developing principl es and frameworks that addresses both human and ecological needs,thus framing equityas a matterofdistribution,proc eduraland interactional fairness [32]. 5.2 Research Despitealackofcommonterminology,similarissuesariseb othintermsofconsiderationsofAIethicsandsustainabilityandconsideringtheinter-connectedness ofthetwowhen designing anddeployingAIsystemsisparamountgiven their socio-technicality and the consequences this can hav e on the human and non-human species residing in these regions. Generalizability. At the nexus of AI ethics and sustainability, existing schol arship has already established that the mostdisadvantaged and marginalized members ofoursocieti es tend tobetheleast well-represented in the Big Data usedinmanyAImodelsandsystems[33,43,68,186];thesamea ppliesatthelevelofcountriesandregions,with global datasets reﬂecting things like wealth and economic develop ment only being tested in a select few countries [24, 84] and themost extensive biodiversitydatasets consisting of data collectedina subset of regions from theGlobalNorth, as well as regions close to cities and roads [15, 196]. Studyi ng the limits of application of AI systems both in terms of ethics and sustainability and how well they generalize to diﬀerent populations of human and non-human subjects is important to question existing assumptions. For instanc e, studies of emblematic datasets such as ImageNet found that it to misrepresent both humans [2021] and other living b eings such as insects and ﬁsh [2023]. Developing new datasetsthataremorerepresentative ofdiversepopulatio nsand contexts-suchas theDollarStreetdataset[167]and CropHarvest [197] - and using this dataset in research and pr actice and help improve the applicability of AI systems and their abilitytorepresent morediverse populationsfro m botha societaland environmental perspective. Evaluation. AsAIisincreasinglyusedintheﬁghtagainstclimatechange ,holisticevaluationofmodelsandsystems becomes ever more relevant. For instance, in the high-stake s domain of solar geoengineering, which aims to develop new ways for modifying the Earth s climate to reduce the glob al warming eﬀect (i.e. by enhancing the reﬂexivity of clouds so that they reﬂect more of the sun s rays), AI is often used to help model the potential far-reaching eﬀects of even minor interventions and understand how they will imp act local and global climate patterns [62, 148, 179]. This is becauseregional changes to theclimatemay trigger i ncreased fragilityof someregions and not others, which is hard to quantify and therefore, to be optimized for in AI mo dels that aim to predict the consequences of climate interventions[83].Forinstance,diﬀerentthresholdsofs olarreﬂexivityareoptimalfordiﬀerentregions,andoptim izing results based on a given region (e.g. the continental United States) would make things worse for others (e.g. Western Africa),whichcansuﬀerdroughtsandotherformsofdamage[ 126].Considerations aroundthewiderreboundeﬀects Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 13 ofproposedAIsolutionsarealsoimportant:forinstance,i nthecaseofAIsystemsthatimproveaircrafteﬃciency[108] , moreeﬃcient aircraft canresultin cheaper airfare and ther efore, moretravel overall5. Transparency. Falk and van Wynsberghe argue that transparency is a crucial factor for establishing whether the net environmental impact of AI for Sustainability is positi ve or how the positive impact on the respective sustainabili ty goal can outweigh the very diﬀerent negative impact of the mo dels development on sustainability" [61] we would expandthistoincludeAIsystemsingeneral,whichshouldus eavarietyofmechanismstocommunicatethecostsand potentialimpactsoftheirsystemsonboththeenvironment a ndsociety.Infact,asproposedbyEhsanetal.,thenotion oftransparencyinAIcanbeexpandedtoencompass"socialtr ansparency",whichinvolves integratingsocio-technical aspects in the description and understanding of AI systems [ 56]. Social transparency involves a portrayal of an AI system s societal impacts, ethical considerations, and ev entually its environmental footprint.By doing so, it provi des a more complete picture, making the AI system transparent bu t also understandable in a broader societal context. This augmented view of transparency, which would integrate both social and environmental dimensions, resonates with the increasing awareness that AI is not simply a technol ogical tool but a socio-technical system with extensive repercussions, spanning bothpeopleand theenvironment [2 02]. Equity.RecognizingthatGreenAI(orsustainableAI),i.e.thedeve lopment anddeploymentofAIsystemsthatputs the emphasis solely on eﬃciency or the reduction of greenhou se gas emissions, is not necessarily inherently more equitable or just for instance, if the more eﬃcient models a re not widely shared, or entail an increased usage of compute due to their eﬃciency is an important ﬁrst step towa rds improving the current direction towards bigger models. Recent research in both AI ethics and sustainabilit y has shed light on the extent to which AI systems enable theampliﬁcationofexisting socialinequities [17,58,115 ]as wellascontributingtothepreservationoftheecologic al status quo vis-a-vis to climate change [194]. Given these ﬁn dings, it is important to make equity-informed trade-oﬀs when developing and deploying AI for instance by carrying o ut energy prediction in resource-constrained energy grids, which arecommonin lowand middle-income countries [13],or by using AI topredict theimpacts of changes inclimateonsocietalaspectssuch as disease propagationa nd health [100]. 5.3 Governance As the ﬁeld of AI ethics increasingly intersects with regula tion, including law and policy, it showcases its interdisci - plinary nature, meaning that in order to be successful, gove rnance initiatives must incorporateeﬀorts from diﬀerent domains, depending onthecontext oftheapplication. Generalizability. While there is no single solution to complex questions invol ving governance over AI systems, various bottom-up governance approaches have been propose d based on the cultural, societal and geographical constraints of AI system deployment. Some of these follow the te nets of the M aori culture, which is based on principles thatconsiderbothimpactsonnatureas wellasonfellowhuma nbeings, bridgingthegapbetweenethicsand sustainability[82,143];othersespousethoseestablishedbytheI ndigenousAIcommunity,whichisbasedonbothvaluesand practices of social and environmental sustainability, bot h core to many Indigenous epistemologies [110]. Also, regulating the deployment of out-of-the-box AI solutions that o perate on the premise of generalizability without taking 5Thisisoftenreferredtoas Jevonsparadox ,whichobservesthatwhentechnological progressimproves theeﬃciencyoftechnology, thisactuallyresults initsincreasedusageand increasesoverallresourceuse[9 3]. 14 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefa la, and Nyalleng Moorosi context into account can help ensure that systems that are me ant to be widely applicable are truly representative of thecontextof application where evaluations, as explaine d below,will playa crucialrole. Evaluation. AsnotedbyMetcalfetal.[2021],thereisaparallelbetween environmental impactassessments and AI ethicsaudits,whichcanbeextendedbeyondethicalcomplia ncetoincludeassessmentsofenvironmentalimpacts,such as energy consumptionand carbonemissions. Requiringaudi ts ofcommercial AI systems beforetheir deployment in practice,bothincontextssuchaseducationandhealthcare thatcomewithhighstakesintermsofsocietalimpacts,but alsoincontextssuchasdisasterpredictionandclimatemod eling,thatcomewithpotentiallywidespreadenvironmenta l impacts, will require the development of new governance app roaches. For instance, attempting to evaluate the wider rebound eﬀects of AI tools and their impacts on consumption a nd human behavior is important to represent their broaderimpactsonbothsocietyand theenvironment [86,96, 194].Finally,integratingbothsocialandenvironmental assessments into existing and in-progress regulation and d eveloping new approaches to evaluate these impacts can help ensure that the deployment of AI systems is carried out i n a way that is ethically sound and sustainable across multipledimensions. Transparency. RecentyearshaveseenlesstransparencyinAIresearchandp ractice,especiallyintermsofgenerative AI models [189]. However, as these systems are increasingly being deployed in society, having more information regardinghowthesesystemswerecreatedanddeployedremai nsparamount.Ensuringthatenoughdetailsareprovided bothregarding theenergy consumedand greenhouse gasses em ittedduringmodeltraining and deployment canhelp track how the environmental impacts of AI are evolving over t ime. Mandating transparency for already deployed AI systemscanhelpestablishaudits,redteamingeﬀortsandAI energyscoreratingstoraiseusers awarenessaroundthe impactsofthesystemstheyuse[29],contributingtowhatca nbetermed"usabletransparency"[144].Byensuringthat theprocessesandresultsofthesepracticesarewell-docum entedandpubliclyaccessible,stakeholderswouldbebette r equippedto understand and evaluate the ethical and sustain able aspects of AI systems. Such policies would promote acultureofopennessintheAIindustry,encouragingdevelo perstoprioritizeethicalconsiderationsandsustainabil ity alongside technical advancements. Equity.Involving multiplestakeholders,especiallyonesfromthe concernedcommunitiesand domains,inthisprocess is important to ensure that diﬀerent perspectives and l ived experiences are reﬂected in the development and deployment of AI systems [170, 171] as well as the diﬀerent co mmunities and can inﬂuence existing and future practices [45, 126]. From a regulatory perspective, the Finnish ETAIROS (Ethical AI for the Governance of the Society) project proposedtheintegration of ethics, sustainabilit y, design and foresight for inter-disciplinary governance of AI systems [133], whereas the White House Oﬃce of Management an d Budget (OMB) s ﬁrst government-wide policy around the usage of AI includes, inter alia, clauses that stipulate that government agencies should tak e both environmental impacts and bias and fairness into account when pr ocuring AI-enabled services [59] - exhibiting thought leadership that willhopefullyhave wider repercussions. 6 CONCLUSION Werecognizethatissuesofethicsandsustainabilityareco mplexand,especiallyinthecontextofemergingtechnologi es like AI, it can be diﬃcult to deﬁne what progress looks like an d how it can be achieved. We do not pretend to have developed a universal approach for either of these issues (a nd do not believe that one can exist) but by adopting a multitude of endeavors such as the ones described in the par agraphs above can help involve diﬀerent actors and Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 15 hopefully build momentum across the AI community. The beaut y of making transversal connections that go above and beyond thesilos in which many AI technologists tend to op erateis that we canalso beinspired bythemultitude ofrichandrelevantworkthathasbeendoneinotherdomains fromecologytophilosophy,aswellasgovernanceand climatescience,toproposewaysforwardthatwouldallowth eAIcommunitytoimprovesystemsfromtheperspective ofbothethicsandsustainability.Lookingforward,theﬁel dofAIethicsisrapidlyevolving,withinsightsracingtoke ep up with the rapid pace of technological advancements in AI. T his dynamic landscape presents an ongoing challenge: todevelopAIinawaythatisinclusive,just,andcognizanto fitsenvironmentalandsocietalimpacts.Furthermore,iti s becomingincreasinglyclearthatAIethicsandsustainabil ityareinterdependent:theymustgohandinhandtoensurea holisticsocietalimpact.Theabsenceofeitheraspectlead stoanincompleteperspective,potentiallyoverlookingcr itical societal and environmental consequences. Therefore, inte grating AI ethics with sustainability is not just beneﬁcial but necessary, ensuring that AI advancements are not only te chnologically innovative and ethically sound but also maximizing their potentialtoengender sustainable advanc ement. 16 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefa la, and Nyalleng Moorosi REFERENCES [1] MohamedAbdallaandMoustafaAbdalla.2021.TheGreyHoo dieProject:Bigtobacco,bigtech,andthethreatonacademi cintegrity.In Proceedings of the 2021AAAI/ACMConferenceon AI,Ethics,and Society . 287 297. [2] Mohamed Abdalla, Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Aurélie N évéol, Fanny Ducel, Saif M Mohammad, and Karën Fort. 2023. Th e elephant in the room:Analyzing the presenceof bigtech innatural language processingresearch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02797 (2023). [3] AI Safety Summit. 2023. The Bletchley Declaration by Cou ntries Attending the AI Safety Summit, 1-2 November 2023. (2 023). https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-safet y-summit-2023-the-bletchley-declaration/the-bletchl ey-declaration-by-countries-attending-the-ai-safety -summit-1- [4] AmazonWeb Services.2021. Sustainabilityinthe Cloud. https://sustainability.aboutamazon.com/environment/ the-cloud. [5] DanielAndler. 2023. Intelligence artiﬁcielle, intelligence humaine: le doubl e énigme. Gallimard,Paris. [6] JuliaAngwin,JeﬀLarson,SuryaMattu,andLaurenKirchn er.2022. Machinebias. In Ethicsofdataandanalytics .AuerbachPublications,254 264. [7] ThomasAquinas.1702. Summa theologica . J.Mentelin. [8] Aristotle. 350. NicomacheanEthics . Originalworkpublished in350 B.C.E.. [9] HutanAshraﬁan.2015. Intelligent robotsmust uphold hu manrights. Nature519 (2015), 391. https://doi.org/10.1038/519391a [10] CarolynAshurst,SolonBarocas,RosieCampbell,andDe borahRaji.2022.DisentanglingtheComponentsofEthicalR esearchinMachineLearning. InProceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accounta bility, and Transparency (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (FAccT 22) . Association for Computing Machinery,NewYork,NY, USA, 2057 2068. https:/ /doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533781 [11] Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Zeinab Liaghat. 2017. Quality -eﬃciency trade-oﬀs in machine learning for text processin g. In2017 IEEE international conferenceon bigdata (bigdata) . IEEE, 897 904. [12] Edward B Barbier.1987. Theconcept ofsustainableecon omic development. Environmentalconservation 14,2 (1987), 101 110. [13] Mohini Bariya, Genevieve Flaspohler, Ngoran Clare-Jo yce, and Margaret Odero. 2023. Topology Estimation from Vol tage Edge Sensing for Resource-ConstrainedGrids. TacklingClimate Change withMachine Learning WorkshopIC LR 2023(2023). [14] VitaSantaBarletta,DaniloCaivano,DomenicoGigante ,andAzzurraRagone.2023. ARapidReviewofResponsibleAIf rameworks:Howtoguide thedevelopmentofethicalAI.In Proceedingsofthe27thInternationalConferenceonEvaluat ion andAssessmentinSoftwareEngineering .358 367. [15] Jan Beck, Marianne Böller, Andreas Erhardt, and Wolfga ng Schwanghart. 2014. Spatial bias in the GBIF database and i ts eﬀect on modeling species geographic distributions. EcologicalInformatics 19 (2014), 10 15. [16] EmilyM.Bender,TimnitGebru,AngelinaMcMillan-Majo r,andShmargaretShmitchell.2021.OntheDangersofStocha sticParrots:CanLanguage Models BeToo Big?.In Proceedings ofthe 2021ACMConferenceonFairness,Accounta bility,and Transparency (VirtualEvent,Canada) (FAccT 21) . Associationfor Computing Machinery,NewYork,NY, USA, 610 623. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922 [17] RuhaBenjamin. 2023. Raceaftertechnology. In Social Theory Re-Wired . Routledge, 405 415. [18] JeremyBentham. 1789. An Introductionto thePrinciples of Moralsand Legislation . T. Payne and Son. [19] Tamay Besiroglu, Sage Andrus Bergerson, Amelia Michae l, Lennart Heim, Xueyun Luo, and Neil Thompson. 2024. The Com pute Divide in MachineLearning:A Threatto AcademicContributionand Scr utiny?arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02452 (2024). [20] Joseph RBiden. 2023. Executive orderonthe safe,secur e,and trustworthy development and useof artiﬁcialintelli gence. (2023). [21] Elettra Bietti. 2020. From Ethics Washing to Ethics Bas hing: A View on Tech Ethics from within Moral Philosophy. In Proceedings of the 2020 ConferenceonFairness,Accountability,andTransparency (Barcelona,Spain) (FAT 20) .AssociationforComputingMachinery,NewYork,NY,USA, 210 219. https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372860 [22] AbebaBirhane,PratyushaKalluri,DallasCard,Willia m Agnew, Ravit Dotan, and Michelle Bao. 2022. The ValuesEnco ded inMachineLearning Research. arXiv:2106.15590[cs.LG] [23] Abeba Birhane, Elayne Ruane, Thomas Laurent, Matthew S . Brown, Johnathan Flowers, Anthony Ventresque, and Christ opher L. Dancy. 2022. The forgotten marginsof AI ethics. In Proceedings of the2022ACMConference onFairness,Accounta bility,and Transparency .948 958. [24] JoshuaBlumenstock. 2018. Don t forget people inthe us eof bigdatafor development. [25] Larissa Bolte, Tijs Vandemeulebroucke, and Aimee van W ynsberghe. 2022. From an Ethics of Carefulness to an Ethics o f Desirability: Going Beyond CurrentEthics Approachesto SustainableAI. Sustainability 14,8 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/su14084472 [26] RishiBommasani,PercyLiang, and Tony Lee. 2023. Holis tic evaluationof language models. Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Sciences 1525,1 (2023), 140 146. [27] Mioara Borza. 2014. The connection between eﬃciency an d sustainability a theoretical approach. Procedia Economics and Finance 15 (2014), 1355 1363. [28] AndrewBrennanandNorvaY.S.Lo.2022. EnvironmentalE thics. InTheStanfordEncyclopediaofPhilosophy (Summer2022ed.),EdwardN.Zalta (Ed.). MetaphysicsResearchLab,Stanford University. [29] Benedetta Brevini. 2020. Black boxes, not green: Mytho logizing artiﬁcial intelligence and omitting the environm ent.Big Data & Society 7, 2 (2020), 2053951720935141. https://doi.org/10.1177/205 3951720935141 [30] Benedetta Brevini.2023. Myths, techno solutionisman d artiﬁcialintelligence: reclaimingAI materialityandit s massiveenvironmental costs. In Handbook of CriticalStudies ofArtiﬁcial Intelligence . Edward Elgar Publishing,869 877. [31] Alexander EI Brownlee, Jason Adair, Saemundur O Harald sson, and John Jabbo. 2021. Exploring the accuracy energy t rade-oﬀ in machine learning. In 2021IEEE/ACMInternational Workshopon GeneticImproveme nt(GI). IEEE, 11 18. Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 17 [32] RobertD.Bullard,GlennS.Johnson,andBeverlyH.Wrig ht.1997. Confronting Environmental Injustice:It stheRi ghtThingtoDo. Race, Gender &Class5,1 (1997), 63 79. [33] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. 2018. Gender shades: I ntersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender c lassiﬁcation. In Conference on fairness,accountabilityand transparency .PMLR,77 91. [34] JoelCastaño,SilverioMartínez-Fernández,XavierFr anch,andJustusBogner.2023. ExploringtheCarbonFootpri ntofHuggingFace sMLModels: A Repository Mining Study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11164 (2023). [35] Alan Chan, Chinasa T Okolo, Zachary Terner, and Angelin a Wang. 2021. The limits of global inclusion in AI developmen t.arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01265 (2021). [36] KylaChasalowand KarenLevy.2021. Representativenes sinstatistics,politics, andmachine learning.In Proceedings of the 2021ACMConference on Fairness,Accountability,and Transparency .77 89. [37] Rachel Chason and Rael Ombuor. 2021. A lack of weather da ta in Africa is thwarting critical climate research. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/09/24/afr ica-climate-weather-data/ [38] ChineseDataLawAlliance. 2023. ChineseArtiﬁcialInt elligence Law,v.1.0. https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/85D8T jMkN9Tl-oWjq15JiQ [39] Concil of EU. 2022. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act: Counci l calls for promoting safe AI that respects fundamental righ ts. https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-rele ases/2022/12/06/artiﬁcial-intelligence-act-councilcalls-for-promoting-safe-ai-that-respects-fundament al-rights/ [40] SashaCostanza-Chock,Inioluwa DeborahRaji,andJoyB uolamwini.2022. Who Auditsthe Auditors? Recommendations fromaﬁeldscanofthe algorithmicauditing ecosystem.In Proceedings ofthe 2022ACMConferenceon Fairness,Accounta bility,and Transparency .1571 1583. [41] JoshCowls,AndreasTsamados,MariarosariaTaddeo,an dLucianoFloridi.2023.TheAIgambit:leveragingartiﬁcia lintelligencetocombatclimate change opportunities, challenges, and recommendations. Ai& Society (2023), 1 25. [42] Kate Crawford and Trevor Paglen. 2021. Excavating AI: T he politics of images in machine learning training sets. Ai & Society 36, 4 (2021), 1105 1116. [43] RowenaCullen. 2001. Addressing the digital divide. Online informationreview 25,5 (2001), 311 320. [44] Amane Dannouni, Stefan A. Deutscher, Ghita Dezzaz, Ada m Elman, Antonia Gawel, Marsden Hanna, Andrew Hyland, Amjad Kharij, Hamid Maher,DavidPatterson,Edmond RhysJones,JulietRothenbe rg,HamzaTber,MaudTexier,and AliZiat.2023. Acceleratin g ClimateActionwith AI. https://www.gstatic.com/gumdrop/sustainability/a ccelerating-climate-action-ai.pdf [45] RozitaDara,SeyedMehdiHazratiFard,andJasminKaur. 2022. Recommendationsforethicalandresponsibleuseofar tiﬁcialintelligenceindigital agriculture. Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence 5(2022), 884192. [46] Hannah Davis.2020. A DatasetisaWorldview. TowardsData Science (2020). [47] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, an d Li Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical im age database. In 2009 IEEE conferenceon computervision and pattern recognition .IEEE, 248 255. [48] NathanDennler,Anaelia Ovalle, Ashwin Singh, LucaSol daini, ArjunSubramonian,Huy Tu,WilliamAgnew, Avijit Gho sh, KyraYee, Irene Font Peradejordi, et al. 2023. Bound by the Bounty: Collaborativ ely Shaping Evaluation Processes for Queer AI Harms. In Proceedings of the 2023 AAAI/ACMConference onAI, Ethics,and Society . 375 386. [49] FatmaDenton.2002. Climatechangevulnerability,imp acts,andadaptation:Whydoesgendermatter? Gender&Development 10,2(2002),10 20. [50] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018). [51] NicholasDiakopoulos.2020. Accountability, transpa rency,and algorithms. The Oxfordhandbook ofethicsof AI 17,4 (2020), 197. [52] Roel Dobbe and Meredith Whittaker. 2019. AI and climate change: how they re connected, and what we can do about it. AI Now Institute 17 (2019). [53] Jesse Dodge, Taylor Prewitt, Remi Tachet des Combes,Er ika Odmark, Roy Schwartz, Emma Strubell, Alexandra Sasha Lu ccioni, Noah A Smith, NicoleDeCario,andWillBuchanan.2022. Measuringthecarb onintensityofAIincloudinstances.In Proceedingsofthe2022ACMConferenceon Fairness,Accountability,and Transparency .1877 1894. [54] JesseDodge, MaartenSap, Ana Marasović,WilliamAgnew , GabrielIlharco,DirkGroeneveld,MargaretMitchell, and Matt Gardner.2021. Documenting largewebtext corpora:Acasestudy onthe colossal c leancrawled corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08758 (2021). [55] Anuoluwapo Abosede Durokifa and Edwin Chikata Ijeoma. 2018. Neo-colonialism and Millennium Development Goals (M DGs) in Africa: A blend of anold wine inanew bottle. AfricanJournal of Science, Technology,Innovation and Dev elopment 10, 3(2018), 355 366. [56] Upol Ehsan, Q. Vera Liao, Michael Muller, Mark O. Riedl, and Justin D. Weisz. 2021. Expanding Explainability: Towar ds Social Transparency in AI Systems. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com puting Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI 21). Association for Computing Machinery,NewYork,NY, USA, Article 82,19 pages . https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445188 [57] Tyna Eloundou, Sam Manning, Pamela Mishkin, and Daniel Rock. 2023. GPTs are GPTs: An early look at the labor market im pact potential of largelanguagemodels. arXiv preprintarXiv:2303.10130 (2023). [58] VirginiaEubanks.2018. Automatinginequality: How high-tech tools proﬁle, police , and punish the poor . St. Martin sPress. [59] Executive Oﬃce of the President, Oﬃce of Management and Budget. 2024. Memorandum for the heads of executive departments and agencies on Advancing Governance, Innovation, an d Risk Management for Agency Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/ 03/M-24-10-Advancing-Governance-Innovation-and-Risk -Management-for-Agency-Use-of-Artiﬁcial-Intelligenc e.pdf 18 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefa la, and Nyalleng Moorosi [60] FlorianEyert and PaolaLopez. 2023. Rethinking Transp arencyasaCommunicativeConstellation. In Proceedings of the 2023ACMConference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Chicago, IL, USA) (FAccT 23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 44 4 454. https://doi.org/10.1145/3593013.3594010 [61] Sophia Falkand Aimee vanWynsberghe. 2023. Challengin g AI for Sustainability:what ought itmean? AI and Ethics (2023), 1 11. [62] AlecFeinberg.2022. SolarGeoengineering Modeling an dApplications forMitigatingGlobalWarming:AssessingKe yParametersandtheUrban Heat Island Inﬂuence. Frontiersin Climate 4 (2022), 870071. [63] H.Felzmann,E.Fosch-Villaronga,C.Lutz,et al.2020. TowardsTransparencybyDesignforArtiﬁcialIntelligence .ScienceandEngineeringEthics 26 (2020), 3333 3361. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-0 20-00276-4 [64] Luciano Floridi, Josh Cowls, Monica Beltrametti, Raja Chatila, Patrice Chazerand, Virginia Dignum, Christoph Lu etge, Robert Madelin, Ugo Pagallo,FrancescaRossi,etal.2018.AI4People anethica lframeworkforagoodAIsociety:opportunities,risks,pri nciples,andrecommendations. Mindsand machines 28 (2018), 689 707. [65] Sorelle A Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Ven katasubramanian. 2021. The (im) possibility of fairness: D iﬀerent value systems require diﬀerentmechanismsfor fairdecision making. Commun.ACM 64,4 (2021), 136 143. [66] Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Amanda As kell, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Ben Mann, Ethan Perez, Ni cholas Schiefer, Kamal Ndousse, et al. 2022. Red teaming language models to redu ce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858 (2022). [67] Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, S id Black, Anthony DiPoﬁ, Charles Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeﬀrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoﬀ, Chr is Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika,Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang,KevinWa ng, and Andy Zou. 2023. A frameworkfor few-shot language mod el evaluation. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10256836 [68] TimnitGebru.2019. Oxford handbook onAI ethics bookch apter onraceand gender. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06165 (2019). [69] Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Je nnifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daumé Iii, and Ka te Crawford. 2021. Datasheetsfordatasets. Commun.ACM 64,12 (2021), 86 92. [70] Sergio Genovesiand JuliaMariaMönig. 2022. Acknowled ging Sustainabilityin the Frameworkof Ethical Certiﬁcati onfor AI. Sustainability 14, 7(2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/su14074157 [71] MarzyehGhassemi,TristanNaumann, Peter Schulam, And rew L Beam, Irene Y Chen, and RajeshRanganath. 2020. A review of challenges and opportunities inmachine learning forhealth. AMIASummitson Translational Science Proceedings 2020 (2020), 191. [72] Amandeep S Gill and Stefan Germann. 2022. Conceptual an d normative approachesto AI governance for a global digital ecosystem supportive of the UN SustainableDevelopment Goals(SDGs). AI and Ethics 2,2 (2022), 293 301. [73] Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick on a pig: De biasing methods cover up systematic gender biasesin word em beddings but do not removethem. arXiv preprintarXiv:1903.03862 (2019). [74] IanGoodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and AaronCourville.20 16.Deep learning . MITpress. [75] Google. 2022. Carbonfreeenergy forGoogle Cloud regio ns. https://cloud.google.com/sustainability/region-c arbon. [76] GreenSoftware Foundation. 2023. CanAI beTrulyGreen? https://greensoftware.foundation/articles/can-ai-tr uly-be-green [77] GreenPeace. 2020. Oil in the Cloud: How Tech Companies a re Helping Big Oil Proﬁt from Climate Destructions. https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/oil-in-the-c loud/ [78] OddErikGundersenandSigbjørnKjensmo.2018. State of theart:Reproducibilityinartiﬁcialintelligence. In Proceedingsofthe AAAIConference on ArtiﬁcialIntelligence , Vol. 32. [79] Thilo Hagendorﬀ. 2022. A virtue-basedframeworkto sup port putting AI ethicsinto practice. Philosophy &Technology 35,3 (2022), 55. [80] BenjaminHaibe-Kainset al.2020. Transparencyand rep roducibilityinartiﬁcialintelligence. Nature586,7829 (2020), E14 E16. [81] KarenHao. 2022. Artiﬁcialintelligence iscreatingan ew colonial world order. MIT Technology Review (2022). [82] KarenHao. 2022. A new visionof artiﬁcialintelligence forthe people. MITTechnology Review (2022). [83] Jan-Christoph Heilinger, Hendrik Kempt, and Saskia Na gel. 2023. Beware of sustainable AI! Uses and abuses of a wort hy goal. AI and Ethics (2023), 1 12. [84] MartinHilbert.2016. Bigdata fordevelopment: A revie wof promisesand challenges. Development Policy Review 34,1 (2016), 135 174. [85] LewisHo,JoslynBarnhart,RobertTrager,YoshuaBengi o,MilesBrundage,AllisonCarnegie,RummanChowdhury,All anDafoe,GillianHadﬁeld, MargaretLevi,et al.2023. International institutions for advanced AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04699 (2023). [86] Mél Hogan. 2018. Bigdataecologies. Ephemera 18,3 (2018), 631. [87] WayneHolmes and Ilkka Tuomi.2022. State of the artand p racticeinAI ineducation. European Journal ofEducation 57,4 (2022), 542 570. [88] SaraHooker,NyallengMoorosi,GregoryClark,SamyBen gio,andEmilyDenton.2020. Characterisingbiasincompres sedmodels. arXivpreprint arXiv:2010.03058 (2020). [89] Ben Hutchinson and Margaret Mitchell. 2019. 50 Years of Test (Un)Fairness: Lessons for Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Atlanta, GA, USA) (FAT 19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 49 58. https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287600 [90] Strategic Imperatives. 1987. Report of the World Commi ssion on Environment and Development: Our common future. Accessed Feb 10 (1987), 1 300. Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 19 [91] Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada. 2023. The Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data Act (AIDA) Compa nion document. https://ised-isde.canada.ca/site/innovation-bettercanada/en/artiﬁcial-intelligence-and-data-act-aidacompanion-document [92] YacineJerniteet al.2022. Datagovernanceinthe ageof large-scaledata-drivenlanguage technology. In Proceedings of the2022ACMConference on Fairness,Accountability,and Transparency .ACM. [93] W Stanley Jevons.1866. Thecoal question. In TheEconomicsofPopulation . Routledge, 193 204. [94] AnnaJobin,MarcelloIenca,andEﬀyVayena.2019. Thegl oballandscapeofAIethicsguidelines. Naturemachineintelligence 1,9(2019),389 399. [95] LN Joppa, Brian O Connor, Piero Visconti, Cathy Smith, Jonas Geldmann, Michael Hoﬀmann, James EM Watson, Stuart HM Butchart, Malika Virah-Sawmy,BenjaminS Halpern, et al.2016. Filling inbio diversitythreatgaps. Science352,6284 (2016), 416 418. [96] LynnHKaack,PriyaLDonti,EmmaStrubell,GeorgeKamiy a,FelixCreutzig,andDavidRolnick.2022. Aligningartiﬁc ialintelligencewithclimate change mitigation. NatureClimate Change 12,6 (2022), 518 527. [97] Eva Kinnebrew,JoseI Ochoa-Brito, Matthew French, Meg anMills-Novoa,ElizabethShoﬀner, and Katherine Siegel. 2 022. Biasesand limitations of GlobalForestChange and author-generated land covermap sindetecting deforestationinthe Amazon. PLoS One 17, 7(2022), e0268970. [98] Bernard Koch, Emily Denton, Alex Hanna, and Jacob G Fost er. 2021. Reduced, reused and recycled: The life of a dataset in machine learning research. arXiv preprintarXiv:2112.01716 (2021). [99] Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Mich ael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsubramani, Weihua Hu, Mich ihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. 2021. Wilds: A benc hmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,5637 5664. [100] JulianKuehnert,DeborahMcGlynn, SekouL.Remy,Aish aWalcott-Bryant,and Anne Jones.2022. SurrogateEnsemble ForecastingforDynamic ClimateImpact Models. arXiv:2204.05795[cs.LG] [101] MaciejKuziemskiandGianlucaMisuraca.2020. AIgove rnanceinthepublicsector:Threetalesfromthefrontierso fautomateddecision-making indemocraticsettings. Telecommunications policy 44,6 (2020), 101976. [102] TravisLaCroixandAlexandraSashaLuccioni.2022. Me taethicalperspectiveson Benchmarking AIethics. arXivpreprintarXiv:2204.05151 (2022). [103] Faisal Ladhak, Esin Durmus, Mirac Suzgun, Tianyi Zhan g, Dan Jurafsky, Kathleen McKeown, and Tatsunori Hashimoto . 2023. When Do PreTraining Biases Propagate to Downstream Tasks? A Case Study in Text Summarization. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European ChapteroftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics ,AndreasVlachosand IsabelleAugenstein(Eds.). Associat ionforComputationalLinguistics,Dubrovnik,Croatia,3206 3219. https://doi.org/10 .18653/v1/2023.eacl-main.234 [104] Himabindu Lakkaraju,Stephen H Bach, and Jure Leskove c. 2016. Interpretable decision sets: A joint frameworkfor description and prediction. InProceedings of the 22nd ACMSIGKDD international conference onknowledge discoveryand data mining .1675 1684. [105] Himabindu Lakkaraju, Ece Kamar, Rich Caruana, and Jur e Leskovec. 2019. Faithful and customizable explanations o f black box models. In Proceedings of the 2019AAAI/ACMConferenceon AI,Ethics,an d Society. 131 138. [106] JulianLamont (Ed.). 2017. DistributiveJustice . Routledge. [107] S.Larssonand F.Heintz. 2020. Transparencyinartiﬁc ialintelligence. Internet PolicyReview 9, 2(2020). https://doi.org/10.14763/2020.2.1469 [108] SoledadLeClainche,EstebanFerrer,SamGibson,Elis abethCross,AlessandroParente,andRicardoVinuesa.2023 .Improvingaircraftperformance usingmachine learning:areview. AerospaceScience and Technology (2023), 108354. [109] Jaana Leikas, Raija Koivisto, and Nadezhda Gotcheva. 2019. Ethical framework for designing autonomous intellig ent systems. Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market,and Complexity 5, 1(2019), 18. [110] Jason Edward Lewis, Angie Abdilla, Noelani Arista, Ka ipulaumakaniolono Baker, Scott Benesiinaabandan, Michel le Brown, Melanie Cheung, Meredith Coleman,Ashley Cordes,Joel Davison,et al.2020. Indigenous protocol and artiﬁcialintelligence position p aper. (2020). [111] Chenyang Li.2013. The Confucian philosophy of harmony .Vol. 10. Routledge. [112] MochenLiao,KaiLan,andYuanYao.2022. Sustainabili tyimplicationsofartiﬁcialintelligenceinthechemicali ndustry:Aconceptualframework. Journal of industrial ecology 26, 1(2022), 164 182. [113] ZacharyCLipton.2018. Themythosofmodelinterpreta bility:Inmachinelearning,theconceptofinterpretabili tyisbothimportantandslippery. Queue16,3 (2018), 31 57. [114] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar J oshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, a nd Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta:A robustlyoptimized bertpretrainingappro ach.arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 (2019). [115] KirstenLloyd.2018. Biasampliﬁcationinartiﬁciali ntelligence systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.07842 (2018). [116] AlexandraSashaLuccioniandAlexHernandez-Garcia. 2023. Countingcarbon:Asurveyoffactorsinﬂuencingtheem issionsofmachinelearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08476 (2023). [117] Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Yacine Jernite, and Emma St rubell. 2023. Power Hungry Processing: Watts Driving the Co st of AI Deployment? arXiv:2311.16863[cs.LG] [118] AlexandraSashaLuccioniandAnnaRogers.2023.Mindy ourLanguage(Model):Fact-CheckingLLMsandtheirRoleinN LPResearchandPractice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07120 (2023). [119] Alexandra Sasha Luccioni and David Rolnick. 2023. Bug s in the data: How ImageNet misrepresents biodiversity. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference onArtiﬁcialIntelligence , Vol. 37. 14382 14390. [120] Alexandra SashaLuccioni,EmmaStrubell, and KateCra wford.2025. FromEﬃciency Gainsto ReboundEﬀects: TheProb lem ofJevons Paradox inAI sPolarized Environmental Debate. arXiv preprintarXiv:2501.16548 (2025). 20 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefa la, and Nyalleng Moorosi [121] AlexandraSashaLuccioni,SylvainViguier,andAnneLaureLigozat.2022. EstimatingthecarbonfootprintofBLO OM,a176Bparameterlanguage model.arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.02001 (2022). [122] FedericaLucivero.2020. Bigdata,bigwaste?Areﬂect ionontheenvironmentalsustainabilityofbigdatainitiat ives.Scienceandengineeringethics 26,2 (2020), 1009 1030. [123] Amanda H Lynch and SiriVeland. 2018. Urgencyinthe Anthropocene . MITPress. [124] Mirca Madianou. 2021. Nonhuman humanitarianism: whe n AI for good can be harmful. Information, Communication & Society 24, 6 (2021), 850 868. [125] MelissaMccradden, Oluwadara Odusi, Shalmali Joshi, Ismail Akrout, Kagiso Ndlovu, Ben Glocker, GabrielMaicas, XiaoxuanLiu,MjayeMazwi, TeeGarnett,etal.2023. What sfairis... fair?Presenting JustEFAB,anethicalframeworkforoperationalizingmedic alethicsandsocialjusticein the integration of clinical machine learning: JustEFAB. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accounta bility, and Transparency . 1505 1519. [126] DuncanP McLaren.2018. Whose climate and whose ethics ? Conceptions of justicein solargeoengineering modelling .Energy research& social science44 (2018), 209 221. [127] NinarehMehrabi,FredMorstatter,NripsutaSaxena,K ristinaLerman,andAramGalstyan.2021.Asurveyonbiasand fairnessinmachinelearning. ACMcomputingsurveys(CSUR) 54,6 (2021), 1 35. [128] Amil Merchant, Simon Batzner, Samuel S Schoenholz, Mu ratahanAykol, Gowoon Cheon, and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. 2023. Sca ling deep learning formaterialsdiscovery. Nature624,7990 (2023), 80 85. [129] Jacob Metcalf, Emanuel Moss, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, and Madeleine Clare Elish. 2021. Algorithmic Impact Assessments and Accountability:TheCo-ConstructionofImpacts.In Proceedingsofthe2021ACMConferenceonFairness,Accounta bility,andTransparency (Virtual Event, Canada) (FAccT 21) .Associationfor Computing Machinery,NewYork,NY, USA, 73 5 746. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445935 [130] Rachel Metz.2024. Google s EmissionsShot Up 48%Over FiveYearsDueto AI. Bloomberg (2024). [131] ThaddeusMetz and Scott C.Miller.2016. Relational et hics. InTheinternational encyclopedia ofethics .1 10. [132] Milagros Miceli, Julian Posada, and Tianling Yang. 20 22. Studying up machine learning data: Why talk about bias wh en we mean power? Proceedings of the ACMon Human-Computer Interaction 6,GROUP (2022), 1 14. [133] NieminenMika,GotchevaNadezhda,LeikasJaana,andK Raija.2019. EthicalAIfortheGovernanceoftheSociety:Ch allengesandOpportunities. InCEURWorkshop Proceedings ,Vol. 2505.20 26. [134] JohnStuart Mill.1863. Utilitarianism . Parker,Son, and Bourn. [135] DavidMillerand MichaelWalzer(Eds.). 1995. Pluralism,Justice,and Equality . Oxford UniversityPress. [136] Margaret Mitchell, Dylan Baker, Nyalleng Moorosi, Em ily Denton, Ben Hutchinson, Alex Hanna, Timnit Gebru, and Ja mie Morgenstern. 2020. Diversityand inclusionmetricsinsubsetselection. In Proceedings ofthe AAAI/ACMConferenceon AI,Ethics,and Soc iety. 117 123. [137] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parke r Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer, In ioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru.2019. Model cardsformodel reporting. In Proceedings of theconference onfairness,accountability, and transparency .220 229. [138] Shakir Mohamed, Marie-TheresePng, and William Isaac . 2020. Decolonial AI: Decolonial theory as sociotechnical foresight in artiﬁcial intelligence.Philosophy &Technology 33 (2020), 659 684. [139] JakobMökander,JonasSchuett, HannahRoseKirk,and L ucianoFloridi.2023. Auditing largelanguagemodels:athr ee-layeredapproach. AIand Ethics(2023), 1 31. [140] ChristophMolnar.2020. Interpretable machinelearning . Lulu.com. [141] StevenGonzalezMonserrate.2022. Thecloud ismateri al:Onthe environmental impactsof computationand datasto rage. (2022). [142] L.Munn. 2022. TheUselessnessof AI Ethics. AI Ethics (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-022-00209-w [143] LukeMunn. 2023. Theﬁvetests: designing and evaluati ngAI accordingto indigenous M aoriprinciples. AI& SOCIETY (2023), 1 9. [144] PatrickMurmannand Simone Fischer-Hübner.2017. Usa bletransparencyenhancing tools: Aliteraturereview. (20 17). [145] Mechthild Nagel.2022. Ludic ubuntu ethics:Decolonizing justice . Taylor& Francis. [146] NationalAcademies of Sciences,Engineering and Medi cine.2019. Reproducibility and replicabilityinscience. (2019). [147] ChrisNorval, KristinCornelius, Jennifer Cobbe, and Jatinder Singh. 2022. Disclosureby Design: Designing Info rmation Disclosuresto Support Meaningful Transparency and Accountability. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accounta bility, and Transparency (Seoul, Republicof Korea) (FAccT 22) .Associationfor Computing Machinery,NewYork,NY, USA, 67 9 690. https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533133 [148] Peer Nowack, Peter Braesicke, Joanna Haigh, Nathan Lu ke Abraham, John Pyle, and Apostolos Voulgarakis. 2018. Usi ng machine learning to build temperature-basedozone parameterizationsforclim atesensitivity simulations. EnvironmentalResearch Letters 13, 10(2018), 104016. [149] VictorOrdonez,TaylorDunn, andEricNoll.2023. Open AI CEOSamAltmansaysAI will reshapesociety,acknowledges risks: Alittle bitscared of this . (2023). https://abcnews.go.com/Technology/op enai-ceo-sam-altman-ai-reshapesociety-acknowledges/ story [150] Friederike Otto. 2023. Without Warning: A Lack of Weat her Stations Is Costing African Lives. https://e360.yale.edu/features/africa-weather-stati ons-climate-change [151] Edward A Page.2008. Distributingthe burdensof clima techange. Environmental Politics 17,4 (2008), 556 575. [152] European Parliament. 2023. Artiﬁcial Intelligence A ct: deal on comprehensive rules for trustworthy AI. (2023). https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/2 0231206IPR15699/artiﬁcial-intelligence-act-deal-oncomprehensive-rules-for-trustworthy-ai Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 21 [153] David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Quoc Le, Chen Liang , Lluis-Miquel Munguia, Daniel Rothchild, David So, Maud Te xier, and Jeﬀ Dean. 2021. Carbonemissionsand largeneuralnetwork training. arXiv preprintarXiv:2104.10350 (2021). [154] Giada Pistilli, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Yacine Jerni te, and Margaret Mitchell. 2023. Stronger Together: on the A rticulation of Ethical Charters, LegalTools,andTechnicalDocumentationinML.In Proceedingsofthe2023ACMConferenceonFairness,Accounta bility,andTransparency ( confloc , city Chicago /city , state IL /state , countr y USA /country , /conf-loc ) (FAccT 23) .AssociationforComputingMachinery,New York, NY, USA, 343 354. https://doi.org/10.1145/3593013 .3594002 [155] ErichPrem.2023. Fromethical AI frameworksto tools: areviewof approaches. AI and Ethics 3,3 (2023), 699 716. [156] Edward Raﬀ.2019. A Step TowardQuantifyingIndepende ntly Reproducible MachineLearningResearch. arXiv:1909. 06674[cs.LG] [157] InioluwaDeborahRaji,EmilyMBender,Amandalynne Pa ullada,EmilyDenton, andAlexHanna.2021. AI andtheeveryt hinginthe wholewide world benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.15366 (2021). [158] Inioluwa DeborahRaji,SASHA COSTANZAChock,andJBuo lamwini.2023. Changefromtheoutside:Towardscredibleth ird-partyauditsof ai systems. Missinglinks in AIgovernance (2023), 5. [159] I. D. Raji, A. Smart, R. N. White, M. Mitchell, T. Gebru, B. Hutchinson, et al. 2020. Closing the AI accountability ga p: Deﬁning an end-to-end frameworkforinternal algorithmic auditing.In Proceedings ofthe 2020Conferenceon Fairness,Accountabil ity,and Transparency .ACM,33 44. [160] Bogdana Rakovaand Roel Dobbe.2023. Algorithms as Soc ial-Ecological-Technological Systems: an Environmental Justice Lens on Algorithmic Audits. In 2023ACMConferenceon Fairness,Accountability,and Trans parency.ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3593013.3594014 [161] AkshatRathi and DinaBass.2024. Microsoft sAI Push I mperils ClimateGoalasCarbonEmissionsJump 30%. Bloomberg (2024). [162] Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Al i Farhadi. 2016. You Only Look Once: Uniﬁed, Real-Time Objec t Detection. arXiv:1506.02640[cs.CV] [163] Jennifer Rhee. 2018. Theroboticimaginary:The humanand the priceof dehumanize d labor. Uof Minnesota Press. [164] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestri n. 2016. Model-agnostic interpretability of machine learn ing.arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05386 (2016). [165] Paola Ricaurte.2022. Ethics for the majorityworld: A I and the questionof violence atscale. Media, Culture &Society 44, 4(2022), 726 745. [166] Anna Rogers.2021. Changing the world bychanging the d ata.arXiv preprintarXiv:2105.13947 (2021). [167] William A Gaviria Rojas, Sudnya Diamos, Keertan Ranja n Kini, David Kanter, Vijay Janapa Reddi, and Cody Coleman. 2 022. The Dollar Street dataset:Imagesrepresentingthegeographicandsocioecon omicdiversityoftheworld.In Thirty-sixthConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessing SystemsDatasetsand BenchmarksTrack . [168] DavidRolnick,PriyaLDonti, LynnHKaack,KellyKocha nski,AlexandreLacoste,KrisSankaran,AndrewSlavinRoss ,NikolaMilojevic-Dupont, NatashaJaques,AnnaWaldman-Brown,etal.2022. Tacklingc limatechangewithmachinelearning. ACMComputingSurveys(CSUR) 55,2(2022), 1 96. [169] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Pa trick Esser, and Björn Ommer. 2022. High-Resolution Image S ynthesis With Latent DiﬀusionModels. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVFConference on ComputerVisionan d Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .10684 10695. [170] Sarah Rotz, Evan Gravely, Ian Mosby, Emily Duncan, Eli zabeth Finnis, Mervyn Horgan, Joseph LeBlanc, Ralph Martin , Hannah Tait Neufeld, Andrew Nixon, et al.2019. Automated pasturesand the digita l divide: How agriculturaltechnologies areshaping labour and ruralcommunities. Journal of Rural Studies 68 (2019), 112 122. [171] Mark Ryan. 2022. The social and ethical impacts of arti ﬁcial intelligence in agriculture: mapping the agricultur al AI literature. AI & SOCIETY (2022), 1 13. [172] Salesforce.2024.SustainableAIPolicyPrinciples. https://www.salesforce.com/content/dam/web/en_us/ww w/documents/company/sustainability/salesforce-susta inable-ai-policy-principles.pdf [173] Nithya Sambasivan, Shivani Kapania, Hannah Highﬁll, Diana Akrong, Praveen Paritosh, and Lora M Aroyo. 2021. Eve ryone wants to do the model work, not the data work : Data Cascades in High-Stakes AI. Inproceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Co mputing Systems.1 15. [174] Aaron Sankin and Surya Mattu. 2023. Predictive Polici ng Software Terrible At Predicting Crimes. https://themarkup.org/prediction-bias/2023/10/02/pr edictive-policing-software-terrible-at-predicting-c rimes. [175] NripsutaAni Saxena,KarenHuang, EvanDeFilippis,Go ranRadanovic,DavidC.Parkes,and YangLiu.2019. How DoFai rnessDeﬁnitionsFare? ExaminingPublicAttitudesTowardsAlgorithmicDeﬁnition sofFairness.In Proceedingsofthe2019AAAI/ACMConferenceonAI,Ethics,an dSociety (Honolulu, HI, USA) (AIES 19) .Associationfor Computing Machinery,NewYork,NY, USA, 99 106. https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314248 [176] DavidSchlosberg.2012. ClimateJusticeandCapabili ties:AFrameworkforAdaptationPolicy. Ethics&InternationalAﬀairs 26,4(2012),445 461. [177] DavidSchlosbergand Lisette B Collins.2014. Fromenv ironmental to climatejustice:climatechange and the disco urseof environmental justice. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:Climate Change 5, 3(2014), 359 374. [178] JurgenSchmidhuber.1991. NeuralSequence Chunkers. Technical Report FKI-148-91 (1991). [179] Christian Schroeder de Witt and Thomas Hornigold. 201 9. Stratospheric Aerosol Injection as a Deep Reinforcement Learning Problem. arXiv e-prints(2019), arXiv 1905. [180] Paul Schütze. 2024. The Problem of Sustainable AI: A Cr itical Assessment of an Emerging Phenomenon. Weizenbaum Journal of the Digital Society4,1 (2024). [181] RoySchwartz, JesseDodge, NoahA Smith, and OrenEtzio ni. 2020. GreenAI. Commun.ACM 63,12(2020), 54 63. 22 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Giada Pistilli, Raesetje Sefa la, and Nyalleng Moorosi [182] Raesetje Sefala,Timnit Gebru,Luzango Mfupe, Nyalle ng Moorosi,and RichardKlein. 2021. Constructing a visuald ataset to study the eﬀects of spatialapartheidinSouth Africa.In Thirty-ﬁfth conferenceon neural information processings ystemsdatasets and benchmarkstrack(round 2) . [183] AndrewDSelbst,DanahBoyd,SorelleAFriedler,Sures hVenkatasubramanian,andJanetVertesi.2019. Fairnessan dabstractioninsociotechnical systems.In Proceedings of theconference onfairness,accountability, and transparency .59 68. [184] SarabSSethi,AveryBick,RobertMEwers,Holger Klinc k,VijayRamesh,Mao-NingTuanmu,and DavidACoomes.2023. L imitsto theaccurate and generalizableuseof soundscapes to monitor biodiversi ty.NatureEcology&Evolution 7, 9(2023), 1373 1378. [185] AbhinavSharma,ArpitJain,PrateekGupta,andVinayC howdary.2020.Machinelearningapplicationsforprecisio nagriculture:Acomprehensive review.IEEEAccess 9(2020), 4843 4873. [186] Ben Shenglin, Felice Simonelli, Zhang Ruidong, Romai n Bosc, and Li Wenwei. 2017. Digital infrastructure: Overco ming the digital divide in emergingeconomies. G20Insights 3 (2017), 1 36. [187] Ahmed AH Siddig. 2019. Why is biodiversity data-deﬁci ency an ongoing conservation dilemma in Africa? Journal for Nature Conservation 50 (2019), 125719. [188] Jessie J Smith, Saleema Amershi, Solon Barocas, Hanna Wallach, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. 2022. Real ML: Recog nizing, exploring, and articulating limitations of machine learning research. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accounta bility, and Transparency . 587 597. [189] Irene Solaiman.2023. Thegradient of generativeAI re lease:Methods and considerations.In Proceedings of the 2023ACMConference on Fairness, Accountability,and Transparency .111 122. [190] Irene Solaiman, Zeerak Talat, William Agnew, Lama Ahm ad, Dylan Baker, Su Lin Blodgett, Hal Daumé III au2, Jesse Dod ge, Ellie Evans, Sara Hooker, Yacine Jernite, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Alberto Lusoli, Margaret Mitchell, Jessica Newman, Marie-Therese Png, Andrew Strait, and Apostol Vassilev.2023. Evaluating the Social Impactof Gen erativeAI SystemsinSystemsand Society. arXiv:2306.0594 9[cs.CY] [191] Maddie Stone. 2024. Microsoft employees spent years ﬁ ghting the tech giant s oil ties. Now, they re speaking out. https://grist.org/accountability/microsoft-employee s-spent-years-ﬁghting-the-tech-giants-oil-ties-nowtheyre-speaking-out/ [192] Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. 20 19. Energy and policy considerations for deep learning in NL P.arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02243 (2019). [193] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Serm anet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincen t Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich.2015. Going deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of theIEEEconferenceon computervision and pat tern recognition .1 9. [194] Sy Taﬀel, Laura Bedford, and Monique Mann. 2019. Ecoci de isn t ethical: Political ecology and capitalist AI ethic s.ECONOMIES OF VIRTUE 20 (2019), 58. [195] Petros Terzis. 2020. Onward for the Freedom of Others: Marching beyond the AI Ethics. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Barcelona, Spain) (FAT 20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 22 0 229. https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3373152 [196] JulienTroudet,PhilippeGrandcolas,AmandineBlin, RégineVignes-Lebbe,andFrédéricLegendre.2017. Taxonom icbiasinbiodiversitydataand societal preferences. Scientiﬁcreports 7, 1(2017), 9132. [197] Gabriel Tseng, Ivan Zvonkov, Catherine Lilian Nakale mbe, and Hannah Kerner. 2021. CropHarvest: A global dataset for croptype classiﬁcation. In Thirty-ﬁfth Conference on Neural Information Processing Sy stems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2) . https://openreview.net/forum?id=JtjzUXPEaCu [198] Asaf Tzachor,Catherine E Richards, MasilinGudoshav a, Patricia Nying uro, Herbert Misiani, Jemimah G Ongoma, Y oav Yair,Yacob Mulugetta, and Amadou TGaye.2023. How to reduceAfrica sundue exposur eto climate risks. Nature620, 7974(2023), 488 491. [199] UN General Assembly. 2015. Transforming our world : th e 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. https://www.refworld.org/legal/resolution/unga/2015 /en/111816 [200] UNESCO. 2021. Recommendation onthe ethics ofartiﬁci alintelligence. [201] Prasetya Ajie Utama, Naﬁse Sadat Moosavi, and Iryna Gu revych. 2020. Towards debiasing NLU models from unknown bia ses.arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12303 (2020). [202] I. van de Poel. 2020. Embedding Values in Artiﬁcial Int elligence (AI) Systems. Minds & Machines 30 (2020), 385 409. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-020-09537-4 [203] Aimee VanWynsberghe.2021. SustainableAI: AI for sus tainabilityand the sustainabilityof AI. AI and Ethics 1,3 (2021), 213 218. [204] GaÃG ,lVaroquaux,AlexandraSashaLuccioni,andMeredithWhitta ker.2024. Hype,Sustainability,andthePriceoftheBigger -is-BetterParadigm inAI.arXiv preprintarXiv:2409.14160 (2024). [205] LuciaVesnic-Alujevic, Susana Nascimento, and Alexa ndre Polvora. 2020. Societal and ethical impacts of artiﬁci alintelligence: Critical notes on Europeanpolicy frameworks. TelecommunicationsPolicy 44,6(2020), 101961. [206] RicardoVinuesa,HosseinAzizpour,IolandaLeite,Ma delineBalaam,VirginiaDignum,SamiDomisch,AnnaFelländ er,SimoneDanielaLanghans, Max Tegmark, and Francesco Fuso Nerini. 2020. The role of art iﬁcial intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Developm ent Goals. Nature communications 11, 1(2020), 1 10. [207] Johannes M Waldmueller. 2015. Agriculture, knowledg e and the colonial matrix of power : approachingsustainab ilitiesfrom the Global South. Journal of Global Ethics 11,3 (2015), 294 302. Bridging theGap: Integrating Ethics and Environmental Sustainability inAI Research and Practice 23 [208] J. Walmsley. 2021. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the Val ue of Transparency. AI & Society 36 (2021), 585 595. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-01066-z [209] LauraWeidinger,KevinR.McKee,RichardEverett,Saﬀ ronHuang,TinaO.Zhu,MartinJ.Chadwick,ChristopherSumm erﬁeld,andIasonGabriel. 2023. Using the Veil of Ignorance to align AI systems with pri nciples of justice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, 18 (2023), e2213709120. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2213709120 arXiv:https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.221 3709120 [210] Craig R White, Dustin J Marshall, Steven L Chown, Susan a Clusella-Trullas, Steven J Portugal, Craig E Franklin, an d Frank Seebacher. 2021. Geographicalbiasinphysiological datalimits prediction sof global change impacts. Functional Ecology 35, 7(2021), 1572 1578. [211] Adrienne Williams,MilagrosMiceli,and TimnitGebru .2022. The exploited laborbehindartiﬁcialintelligence. NoemaMagazine 13(2022). [212] T.Wischmeyer.2020. ArtiﬁcialIntelligence and Tran sparency:Opening the BlackBox. In Regulating ArtiﬁcialIntelligence . Springer,75 101. [213] RobertWolfeandAylinCaliskan.2022. American==whi teinmultimodallanguage-and-imageai.In Proceedingsofthe2022AAAI/ACMConference on AI,Ethics,and Society . 800 812. [214] BigScienceWorkshop,TevenLeScao,AngelaFan,Chris topherAkiki,ElliePavlick,SuzanaIlić,DanielHesslow,R omanCastagné,AlexandraSasha Luccioni,FrançoisYvon,etal.2022. BLOOM:A176b-paramet eropen-accessmultilinguallanguagemodel. arXivpreprintarXiv:2211.05100 (2022). [215] Carole-JeanWu,RamyaRaghavendra,UditGupta,Bilge Acun,NewshaArdalani,KiwanMaeng,GloriaChang,FionaAga Behram,JamesHuang, CharlesBai,et al.2021. SustainableAI: Environmental Imp lications,Challenges and Opportunities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00364 (2021). [216] D. Zeng. 2015. AI Ethics: Science Fiction Meets Techno logical Reality. IEEE Intelligent Systems 30, 03 (may 2015), 2 5. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2015.53 [217] Hongyang Zhang, Yaodong Yu, JiantaoJiao, EricXing, L aurentEl Ghaoui, and MichaelJordan.2019. Theoreticallyp rincipled trade-oﬀ between robustnessand accuracy.In International conference onmachine learning . PMLR,7472 7482. [218] AramZiai.2016. Development discourseand global history:Fromcolonialis m tothe sustainable development goals . Taylor& Francis. [219] Ofer Zwikael and John Smyrk. 2015. Project governance : Balancing control and trust in dealing with risk. International Journal of Project Management 33,4 (2015), 852 862.